
(Pall Mall Gazette, May 13, 1886)


The Countess Martinengo deserves well of all poets, peasants and
publishers. Folk-lore is so often treated nowadays merely from the point
of view of the comparative mythologist, that it is really delightful to
come across a book that deals with the subject simply as literature. For
the Folk-tale is the father of all fiction as the Folk-song is the mother
of all poetry; and in the games, the tales and the ballads of primitive
people it is easy to see the germs of such perfected forms of art as the
drama, the novel and the epic. It is, of course, true that the highest
expression of life is to be found not in the popular songs, however
poetical, of any nation, but in the great masterpieces of self-conscious
Art; yet it is pleasant sometimes to leave the summit of Parnassus to
look at the wildflowers in the valley, and to turn from the lyre of
Apollo to listen to the reed of Pan. We can still listen to it. To this
day, the vineyard dressers of Calabria will mock the passer-by with
satirical verses as they used to do in the old pagan days, and the
peasants of the olive woods of Provence answer each other in amoebaean
strains. The Sicilian shepherd has not yet thrown his pipe aside, and
the children of modern Greece sing the swallow-song through the villages
in spring-time, though Theognis is more than two thousand years dead.
Nor is this popular poetry merely the rhythmic expression of joy and
sorrow; it is in the highest degree imaginative; and taking its
inspiration directly from nature it abounds in realistic metaphor and in
picturesque and fantastic imagery. It must, of course, be admitted that
there is a conventionality of nature as there is a conventionality of
art, and that certain forms of utterance are apt to become stereotyped by
too constant use; yet, on the whole, it is impossible not to recognize in
the Folk-songs that the Countess Martinengo has brought together one
strong dominant note of fervent and flawless sincerity. Indeed, it is
only in the more terrible dramas of the Elizabethan age that we can find
any parallel to the Corsican voceri with their shrill intensity of
passion, their awful frenzies of grief and hate. And yet, ardent as the
feeling is, the form is nearly always beautiful. Now and then, in the
poems of the extreme South one meets with a curious crudity of realism,
but, as a rule, the sense of beauty prevails.
Some of the Folk-poems in this book have all the lightness and loveliness
of lyrics, all of them have that sweet simplicity of pure song by which
mirth finds its own melody and mourning its own music, and even where
there are conceits of thought and expression they are conceits born of
fancy not of affectation. Herrick himself might have envied that
wonderful love-song of Provence:
    If thou wilt be the falling dew
       And fall on me alway,
    Then I will be the white, white rose
       On yonder thorny spray.
    If thou wilt be the white, white rose
       On yonder thorny spray,
    Then I will be the honey-bee
       And kiss thee all the day.
    If thou wilt be the honey-bee
       And kiss me all the day,
    Then I will be in yonder heaven
       The star of brightest ray.
    If thou wilt be in yonder heaven
       The star of brightest ray,
    Then I will be the dawn, and we
       Shall meet at break of day.



How charming also is this lullaby by which the Corsican mother sings her
babe to sleep!
    Gold and pearls my vessel lade,
       Silk and cloth the cargo be,
    All the sails are of brocade
       Coming from beyond the sea;
    And the helm of finest gold,
    Made a wonder to behold.
       Fast awhile in slumber lie;
       Sleep, my child, and hushaby.
    After you were born full soon,
       You were christened all aright;
    Godmother she was the moon,
       Godfather the sun so bright.
    All the stars in heaven told
    Wore their necklaces of gold.
       Fast awhile in slumber lie;
       Sleep, my child, and hushaby.


Or this from Roumania:
    Sleep, my daughter, sleep an hour;
    Mother's darling gilliflower.
    Mother rocks thee, standing near,
    She will wash thee in the clear
    Waters that from fountains run,
    To protect thee from the sun.
    Sleep, my darling, sleep an hour,
    Grow thou as the gilliflower.
    As a tear-drop be thou white,
    As a willow tall and slight;
    Gentle as the ring-doves are,
    And be lovely as a star!



We hardly know what poems are sung to English babies, but we hope they
are as beautiful as these two. Blake might have written them.
The Countess Martinengo has certainly given us a most fascinating book.
In a volume of moderate dimensions, not too long to be tiresome nor too
brief to be disappointing, she has collected together the best examples
of modern Folk-songs, and with her as a guide the lazy reader lounging in
his armchair may wander from the melancholy pine-forests of the North to
Sicily's orange-groves and the pomegranate gardens of Armenia, and listen
to the singing of those to whom poetry is a passion, not a profession,
and whose art, coming from inspiration and not from schools, if it has
the limitations, at least has also the loveliness of its origin, and is
one with blowing grasses and the flowers of the field.
Essays in the Study of Folk-Songs. By the Countess Evelyn Martinengo
Cesaresco. (Redway.)



